Combining Knowledge and Search to Solve Single-suit Bridge
Ian Frank
Complex Games Lab
Electrotechnical Laboratory
Umezono 1-1-4, Tsukuba
Ibaraki, JAPAN 305
ianf@etl.go.jp
David Basin
Institut f¨ur Informatik
Universit¨at Freiburg
Am Flughafen 17
Freiburg, Germany
basin@informatik.uni-freiburg.de
Alan Bundy
Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
80 South Bridge
Edinburgh EH1 1HN
A.Bundy@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
In problem solving, it is often important not only to find
a solution but also to be able to explain it. We use the
game of Bridge to illustrate how tactics, which formalise
domain-specific expertise, can be used for both these tasks.
Our Bridge tactics constrain search to the point where opti-
mal strategies can quickly be identified, and also provide the
key to explaining these strategies in human-understandable
terms. We demonstrate this using a canonical set of single-
suit Bridge problems from a definitive expert text. FINESSE
‘solves'these problems in the technical sense that, in addition
to always finding optimal solutions (and revealing a 3% error
rate in the expert answers), it also explains each solution in
simple, clear English text.
Introduction
There is a big difference between finding a solution to a
problem and being able to communicate that solution to
others. In computer games, this distinction has been re-
ferred to as the difference between cracking and solving a
game (Allis, van den Herik, & Herschberg 1991). To crack
a game, a program needs to play optimally. But to solve
it, the program's play must also be explainable in human-
understandable terms.
In practice, solving a game is much harder than crack-
ing it. Considerable advances in search algorithms and spe-
cialised hardware have led to strong computer play in games
like chess, but have provided little help in explaining the re-
sulting moves; ask a typical chess program why it made that
pawn capture and you are lucky to get back a screenful of
numbers. In contrast to this trend, we show in this paper
how a difficult and significant part of the game of Bridge
can be ‘solved'in the technical sense.
Bridge is a game with imperfect information and enor-
mous search spaces. We consider a sub-problem of the game
that has been heavily analysed by experts: finding the opti-
mal way to play the cards in a single suit. Analysis of single-
suit Bridge problems (also called suit combinations) is chal-
lenging even for master-level players. There are a number of
Bridge books that cover the problem in depth (ACBL 1994;
Copyright c
 2000, American Association for Artificial Intelli-
gence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Kosmulski 1990; Brock 1998; Roudinesco 1996)1, and the
author of one of these (a world life master), notes:
‘How should I have handled this suit?' Seek advice
from twenty experts, and you will get twenty different
answers, among which at least nineteen will be wrong.
Clearly the subject is very difficult and complicated,
and there are not many bridge players able to cope cor-
rectly with all the suit combinations they meet. (Roudi-
nesco 1996, p.9)
Cognitive studies (Engle & Bukstel 1978; Charness 1979;
1989) have shown that human players routinely plan their
Bridge play by first considering individual suit combina-
tions, and that human performance in Bridge can be at-
tributed to the acquisition of high-level patterns and chunks
of knowledge gained through experience. Our contribution
here is to show that a computer can also use a set of patterns
to find and explain optimal strategies for single-suit play.
To do this, we formalise expert knowledge about Bridge
as a set of seven tactics, each of which represents a sim-
ple, distinct manoeuvre, such as playing a winner or finessing
(manoeuv ering against) missing cards. Any given suit com-
bination is then solved by searching the space of possible
tactic applications. This search is carried out by a new im-
perfect information search algorithm that quickly finds op-
timal solutions, despite the task being NP-complete in the
size of the game tree. The use of tactics has two benefits: it
speeds up the search, and it results in strategies that are trees
of tactics rather than trees of individual moves. We show
that a natural consequence of producing high-level trees is
that strategies can then be explained in plain text.
Our ideas are implemented in a system called FINESSE .
Although FINESSE 's use of tactics significantly prunes the
search space, all optimal strategies remain. We demonstrate
this empirically by testing the system on a database of over
1500 problems from a canonical Bridge reference (ACBL
1994). FINESSE solves all these problems in an average of
1All these books implicitly use the best defence model (Frank
& Basin 1998) to analyse Bridge problems. In this model, (1) the
opponents have perfect information; (2) they choose their strategy
second; and (3) the optimal strategy is a pure strategy (making no
use of probabilistic choices such as ‘80%of the time do this, 20%
of the time do that'). This is also the model assumed throughout
the current paper.
From: AAAI-00  Proceedings. Copyright © 2000 , AAAI (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 
just over 0.6sec, and also finds 58 errors in the test database
(a rate of over 3%). Sometimes, FINESSE even discovers
strategies that are new to the Bridge community; two of
these new strategies were the subject of a recent article in
a leading Bridge magazine (Frank & Basin 2000a).
Previous research on high-level approaches for playing
computer Bridge includes the work of (Smith & Nau 1996),
who won the 1997 computer Bridge championships with a
program incorporating AI planning techniques. We have
also previously shown the feasibility of using tactics for
single-suit play (Frank, Basin, & Bundy 1992). Espe-
cially in the light of the cognitive research cited above,
there are many worthwhile questions to be answered on how
such knowledge-based approaches can be used to replicate
the human ability of piecing together single-suit plans into
global strategies. The more recent success of brute-force
techniques such as GIB (Ginsberg 1999) suggests that the
small but frequent errors made by a Monte Carlo sampling
approach are no barrier to competing with strong human
Bridge players, but the research reported in this paper repre-
sents the first time that a part of the game has been cracked
or solved. FINESSE is fast enough for real-time use — for
example as part of a program for playing complete hands —
and its further ability to explain strategies in plain text sug-
gests the viability of our approach as the basis of a real-time
Bridge tutor.
A Bridge Example
For a detailed description of Bridge, readers are referred to
one of the excellent books on the subject, such as (Goren
1986). Here, we give some idea of single-suit play with the
following example:
N
EW
S
AQ
2
In presenting single-suit problems such as this, it is con-
ventionally assumed that South (S) is the declarer and his
partner, North (N), places his cards on the table for all to
see. The division of the remaining cards in the suit (held by
East (E) and West (W)) is unknown, and the task is to spec-
ify the optimal way for South to play the cards from both his
own hand and from North's. Typically, the goal is to win a
certain number of tricks, or rounds of play.
In this example, declarer can win one certain trick by
playing the Ace. However, if this card is played immedi-
ately, the only chance of making two tricks is if East or West
holds the singleton King, so that it falls when the Ace is
played. So, this play of cashing the Ace succeeds in win-
ning two tricks for only two of the possible ways that
the remaining 10 cards in the suit can be split between East
and West.
A better solution is to play the two from the South hand.
By covering whatever card West plays, declarer can then win
two tricks whenever West has the King — a chance.
This play follows the elementary principle that the best re-
sults are obtained by forcing an opponent to play ahead of
you. It is a typical example of a standard manoeuvre called a
finesse.
When planning a hand, human players will make use of
their knowledge of commonly occurring patterns like the fi-
nesse to avoid having to consider all the possible combina-
tions of plays of single cards. FINESSE attempts to replicate
this capability by restricting declarer's options at each stage
of the play to a similar set of such manoeuvres, as defined by
its tactics.
Our Bridge Tactics
FINESSE 's tactics extend and improve the tactic set we in-
troduced in (Frank, Basin, & Bundy 1992). They distill
all possible attacking plays into seven distinct and simple
manoeuvres easily understood by Bridge players. Four of
these tactics represent different types of finesse, which we
simply number from 1 to 4. For example, the lead of the two
we discussed in the previous section was a Type 1 finesse.
The other three tactics are ‘cash',‘duck',and ‘sequence'.
Cashing corresponds to playing a top card that is guaranteed
to win (we also saw an example of a cash in the previous
section). Ducking, on the other hand, is the act of deliber-
ately losing a trick by playing the lowest cards from both
the North and South hands. This is sometimes useful for in-
creasing the chances of winning tricks with the remaining
cards. Finally, sequencing handles situations that have no
element of manoeuvre; North or South simply plays a card
from the highest sequence held by the combined hands.
To enable these seven tactics to be used to guide search,
we formally specified their applicability preconditions as
Prolog clauses. Each such clause takes a representation of
the game state as its first argument. If the preconditions in
the body of the clause succeed, the result is a tactic, rep-
resented as a Prolog term. The Prolog predicates used by
FINESSE to represent tactics will sometimes appear in the
figures of this paper. These should be fairly self-explanatory.
For example, cash(a,h) denotes the cashing of the Ace
of hearts, and finesse(1, west, q, s) denotes a
Type 1 finesse of the Queen of spades against West (the op-
timal play for the AQ-2 example).
Building the Space of Tactics
FINESSE 's tactics specify the possible ways to play a sin-
gle trick. The search space for a given problem is then the
tree of possible tactic applications. To build this tree, a root
(MAX) node is first generated, representing the initial game
state. Successor (MIN) nodes are then produced by iterating
through each of the applicable tactics. From each of these
nodes, a new level of MAX nodes is produced by iterating
through the possible plays by East and West. The process
of expanding MAX nodes by checking for applicable tactics
is then repeated recursively, until no more tactics apply. In
general, both the declarer and East/West will have a num-
ber of options at each node, so that trees will be of the form
illustrated in Figure 1.
Q AA QQQQQQQA QQ Q
-- ---- - - - - - - - -
Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf Leaf
W
S
E
N
A Q
2
K/xv/xv/K x/v v/K x/K v/x K/x x/x
cash(a,s)finesse(1,west,q,s)
Start State:
Leaf LeafLeafLeaf
K/v x/v K/vx/xx/K
Figure 1: A game tree built with tactics
This example shows the tree generated by FINESSE for
our AQ-2 example. The North and South cards are shown
at each non-terminal MAX node, and the MIN nodes are
represented by circles. The labels on the MIN branches de-
note the cards played by West and East on the first trick (e.g.,
‘K/v'denotes West playing the King with East unable to fol-
low in the suit), and an ‘x'indicates an arbitrary low card.
After the first trick, MAX has only one remaining card. If
this cannot be cashed, then the node is a leaf node. Oth-
erwise, the tree includes a further branch, representing the
cash.
Searching the Space of Tactics
The MIN branches of Figure 1 can only be followed by
East/West if they hold the appropriate cards (e.g., West can
only play the King if he was dealt it). If we don't distinguish
between the nine low cards in this problem, there are 20 dis-
tinct outcomes of the initial deal (for either East or West,
they may hold between 0 and 9 low cards, and either hold
the King or not). We call each of these possibilities a world
and label the leaf nodes of a tree with the payoff in each
world. To formalise this, for any leaf-node of a tree with
possible worlds, let the function payoff-vector return the
-element vector in which (the th element of )
takes the value of the payoff at in world ( ).
For any world in which cannot be reached, the value of
is , i.e., undefined. For example, the vector for the
leftmost branch of Figure 1 would consist of one payoff of
2 (the world where East has no spades) and nineteen s (all
the remaining worlds).
Given a game tree, a specification of exactly one branch
at each MAX node in the tree defines a MAX strategy.F or
any such strategy, we can determine its chance of success
with respect to the best defence model (see footnote on first
page) by a bottom-up pass through the tree, as follows: (1)
at leaf nodes, back up the -tuple payoff-vector ; (2) at
MAX nodes, back up the vector from the daughter node on
the branch specified by the strategy; and (3) at MIN nodes
that have daughters with the vectors , , , ,
back up the -tuple:
(1)
where , for all .
This simple procedure produces a single vector at the root
of a game tree, giving the strategy's payoff in each world.
To find an optimal strategy we could iterate this procedure
over each strategy. In practice, though, it is more efficient to
propagate payoff-vectors in parallel. To this end, we define
a vector propagation algorithm that backs up sets of vec-
tors so that the outcome of each possible strategy in a node's
subtree is represented by one of the vectors in the set pro-
duced at that node. This algorithm is defined in Figure 2,
where is a function that computes the set of imme-
diate subtrees of a tree . At MAX nodes, no single branch
is selected; instead, the results of all possible MAX branch
selections are retained by collecting the vectors from all the
daughter MIN nodes. At MIN nodes with branches, the
function first forms a set in which each element is itself a
set containing exactly one vector from each of the initial
sets. It then applies Equation (1) to each element , ,
, of this set.
In general, the number of vectors produced by vec-prop
at any MAX or MIN node will be the same as the number
of strategies in the subtree rooted on that node. This is ex-
ponential in the size of the tree. However, it is known that
finding optimal strategies against best defence for this type
of game tree is NP-complete in the size of the tree (Frank
& Basin 2000b). Thus, unless P=NP, no efficient algorithm
exists. To improve the (exponential) efficiency of vec-prop,
we include a simple pruning step: if the collection of vec-
tors at a node contains members that are pointwise less than
or equal to any other member at that node, these vectors are
ignored as inevitably giving rise to inferior strategies. For
our trees of Bridge tactics, this pruning is sufficient to allow
all the problems in our databases to be solved, in an average
time of just over 0.6sec.
Selecting the ‘best'vector from the set at the root of a
tree depends on the particular goal. We have implemented
the three alternatives shown in Figure 3. We use a version
of vec-prop that backs up information on branch choices to-
gether with the vectors, so that identifying the best vector for
a given goal also identifies a strategy. For the AQ-2 exam-
ple, the best strategy for all three goals is the same: finesse
the Queen.
Algorithm vec-prop :
Take the following actions, depending on .
Condition Result
is leaf node payoff-vector
root of is a MAX node vec-prop
root of is a MIN node vec-prop
Figure 2: The vector propagation algorithm
Goal Required strategy optimises chances of
max taking the maximum number of tricks
Ntricks taking at least tricks, max
expected highest expected number of tricks
Figure 3: Three possible goals for a suit combination
Generating Explanations
FINESSE produces explanations of its strategies in three
steps. The first identifies from a strategy the possible paths
that need to be explained. The second removes from consid-
eration move sequences or game situations that are too sim-
ple to warrant explanation. Finally, the third uses pattern-
matching and knowledge of Bridge idioms to produce En-
glish text. We describe these three steps below. Note that
each one is largely game-general, and that there is nothing
in our account that requires explanations to be in English.
The generation rules are simple enough for us to also con-
struct another set that works in, say, Japanese or German.
Step 1: Path Extraction. The strategy to be explained
defines a subset of the paths in the tactic search space (by
virtue of selecting specific branches at MAX nodes, such as
a finesse of a Queen). To decide which of these paths to ex-
plain, we take into account the goal (from Figure 3) that the
strategy optimises. When explaining a strategy for the goal
max, some paths in the strategy may fail to produce the max-
imum possible number of tricks. For example, when finess-
ing in our example of AQ-2, the MIN branch x/K (where
the Queen loses to East's King) leads to a leaf node where
declarer has won just one trick (with the Ace). Such paths
that fail to produce the maximum number of tricks are ig-
nored. Similarly, for the goal Ntricks, we extract only paths
that achieve or exceed tricks at the leaf node. And, for
expected, we extract only paths for which the payoff at the
leaf nodes is higher than the minimum possible payoff for
the problem.
The paths extracted from a search space in this way are
Figure 4: Screen capture of the tree extracted by FINESSE
from the game tree for the AQ-2 problem
recombined into a new tree where paths that differ in just
their MIN plays are merged. For example, Figure 4 shows
the new tree produced by FINESSE for the optimal strat-
egy when playing AQ-2. The two branches represent four
paths through the original tree. The left branch represents
the two paths where West plays the King, so that declarer
wins with the Ace and cashes the Queen on the second round
(MIN branches K/v and K/x). The right branch represents
the two paths where West plays low and the Queen wins, so
that the Ace can then be cashed (x/v and x/x).
Step 2: Pruning Game Trees. Sometimes parts of a strat-
egy describe situations that are so straightforward that only a
beginner would expect an explanation. As described below,
we implement two functions that identify and prune (1) bad
moves, and (2) situations that are particularly easy to play.
This leaves the parts of the game tree containing only the
‘interesting'branches of the original strategy.
The first pruning function identifies clearly bad moves.
In our trees, each MIN branch can only be followed under
certain distributions of the outstanding cards. We therefore
find bad moves by looking for branches that should never
be followed by East/West. Such branches can be identified
by checking that, for every possible distribution, there is a
different path through the tree that restricts MAX to fewer
tricks.
The second pruning function identifies easy playing sit-
uations. First, it prunes MIN nodes if each branch of the
node leads to a linear tree. The justification for this is that
linearity implies that MAX's best moves are not affected by
the responses made by MIN: whatever moves MIN makes,
MAX's best strategy is straightforward. Second, it prunes a
particularly trivial kind of Bridge situation: any MIN node
with a subtree containing only cash tactics. This heuristic is
justified by noting that cashing a top card is the simplest pos-
sible play. The reader of FINESSE 's explanations is expected
to bear in mind that if no explicit direction is given, the de-
fault action is to cash a top card. In practice, this is always
obvious: if the declarer still holds top cards, it is clearly ad-
vantageous to keep playing. A simple example of pruning is
provided by Figure 4. Both the above pruning rules identify
the top-most MIN node as an easy situation, leaving just a
single MAX branch to be explained: finesse the Queen.
Step 3: Pattern Matching. The final step in automati-
cally explaining strategies is performed by pattern matching,
which maps the branches of an extracted and pruned tree
into English text. Most of the basic operations carried out in
this step are game-general. We describe three representative
examples here.
First, when there is a linear sequence such as MAX
MIN MAX in a tree (i.e., the MAX and MIN
nodes each have a single daughter node), the natural expla-
nation is not ‘Dotactic T1 then whatever MIN does, do tactic
T2,...'. Much better is ‘Dotactics T1 and T2,...'. We incor-
porate a sequentialisation step to compile down such linear
sequences in trees. Second, MIN branches can have multi-
ple labels (e.g., as in Figure 4). When this is the case, the
branches are ordered so that the branch with fewest labels
comes first. This allows the final (longest) branch label to be
explained as ‘otherwise...'. Finally, as a special case of se-
quentialisation, a tree may contain a linear sequence where
T1 and T2 are the same tactic. This is rendered as ‘Dotactic
T1 and repeat if necessary'.
Explanations are produced by a simple recursive function
that incorporates the above operations. The basic action is
simple: for each branch at the root of a tree, output some
text describing the branch and then explain the subtree. If
the root is a MAX node, the output text describes the tac-
tic, and if the root node is a MIN node, the text describes
the MIN moves. For formatting, line-breaks are added after
each MAX tactic, and the th MIN level is indented spaces.
Only limited Bridge knowledge is required to explain
the tactics, since they already correspond directly to Bridge
plays that humans understand. It is also simple to describe
the MIN plays in terms of the cards they represent. Just one
further piece of Bridge-specific knowledge is required. If the
extracted tree is linear, the tree can only contain cash tactics.
We explain such trees as simply ‘cashtop honors'.
Performance: Discovery of Errors
We tested FINESSE on the suit combinations from the Offi-
cial Encyclopedia of Bridge (ACBL 1994). This book con-
tains a 55-page section presenting optimal strategies for 665
single-suit problems, chosen for their coverage of possible
play situations. We created three separate test databases
from these problems, corresponding to the three goals given
in Figure 3. In total, these databases contain 1561 prob-
lems (less than 665 3 since the Encyclopedia often gives
no strategy for one or two of the goals).
FINESSE solves all these problems correctly. On an Ultra
SPARC-II at 450MHz, building the tree of tactics requires
an average of 0.39sec per problem and applying vec-prop
requires a further 0.25sec (in fact, we use a slightly modi-
fied version of vec-prop that incorporates the beta-reduction
heuristic (Frank & Basin 2000b) — this leaves the average
time per problem unaffected, but reduces the worst case so-
lution time from 52sec to 7sec). The average number of
leaf nodes in FINESSE 's tactic trees is 1,330. In contrast,
the trees of possible card plays (even if we generate just one
branch for plays of cards from the same sequence) have an
average of 47,000 leaf nodes. These larger trees can still
be solved by vec-prop in an average of around 4sec, but the
worst case solution time is over 80sec. For both types of
tree, the average number of vectors produced by vec-prop at
the root of a tree is 6.4.
FINESSE also discovers 58 errors in the Encyclopedia so-
lutions (16 in the database, 11 in the database
and 31 in the database). This overall error rate of
3.7% is somewhat surprising, as the Encyclopedia has gone
through many editions and is a well-known reference for se-
rious players. The discovery of these errors is evidence of
the difficulty of the problem, and of the effectiveness of our
approach. It is also of interest to Bridge players: FINESSE 's
identification of these errors, and in particular its discovery
of two novel strategies, was recently the subject of an article
in the magazine Bridge World (Frank & Basin 2000a).
Performance: Example Explanations
We used FINESSE to generate explanations for all the prob-
lems in our databases (generating explanations takes negli-
gible time). We lack space here for a detailed analysis, but
Figure 5 gives some typical examples. For instance, (12) il-
lustrates the recognition of a repeated tactic, (25) provides
an example of sequentialisation, and (26) and (28) show the
effect of using ‘otherwise...'
These examples show that FINESSE not only produces
optimal strategies that are explainable in human terms (and
thus solves single-suit play in the technical sense), but that
FINESSE itself is capable of generating natural language ex-
planations comparable to those produced by human experts.
They also highlight the extra possibilities — over and above
simply explaining an optimal strategy — that can be used to
improve explanations in a reference text:
give descriptions of card distributions under which strate-
gies succeed, e.g., (3), (12),
vary the presentation and terminology when describing a
number of similar problems, e.g., ‘playoff the top honors'
and ‘cashtop honors'in (5) and (24),
compare the optimal strategy with slightly inferior strate-
gies for a problem, e.g., (25),
give pointers to problems with similar solutions, e.g.,
(28), (31) (although note that the Encyclopedia is mis-
taken to relate (31) to (26), as it is now not possible to
win 4 tricks when East is void; FINESSE produces a cor-
rect strategy and explanation),
explain more than one strategy, when the optimal strategy
is not unique, e.g., (62), and
mention alternative strategies that can take advantage of
weak defence, e.g., (5). However, such strategies break
the best defence assumptions that the opponents will play
optimally; if the assumption of weak defence turns out to
be incorrect, the chance of success of the alternative strat-
egy will be lower than that of the ‘bestdefence'strategy.
The last of these techniques is a topic for further research.
We are using all the rest, however, in producing a computer-
authored Bridge reference with FINESSE .
Conclusions
We have shown that a set of seven tactics can be used to
represent all attacking plays for Bridge card combinations.
The search space reduction due to searching at the tactic-
level enabled us to apply a new optimal search algorithm,
and resulted in compact strategies constructed from human-
understandable units.
Not only are FINESSE 's strategies explainable, but FI-
NESSE explains its strategies automatically.W e gave ex-
amples of these explanations and showed that they are com-
parable to those found in human texts. We also identified
some of the further qualities beyond simply ‘explaining an
optimal strategy' that are found in texts written by human
experts. We are currently adding these qualities to FINESSE ,
so that it too can author its own expert text.
Num: (3) AKQJ9-xx Max Tricks: 5
Cash top honors in the hope of dropping the ten
cash the Ace
if East shows out finesse the nine
Num: (5) AKQJ8-xx Max Tricks: 5
Cash top honors. (But against defenders who would not
falsecard from 109x or 109xx, cash the jack and finesse the
eight if the nine or ten appears from East)
cash top honors
Num: (11) AKQ10-xx Max Tricks: 4
Cash the queen, and then finesse the ten
cash the Ace
if both play low or East shows out finesse the 10
Num: (12) AKQ9-xx Max Tricks: 4
Finesse the nine: hope that West has both the jack and ten
finesse the nine
and repeat if necessary
Num: (23) AKxxx-Q10 Max Tricks: 5
Finesse the ten
finesse the 10
Num: (24) AK9xx-Qx Max Tricks: 5
Play off the top honors
cash top honors
Num: (25) AKQ10-xxx Max Tricks: 4
Cash the king and queen; if both follow, play the ace. This
is 2% better than a third-round finesse
cash the Ace and King
if East shows out finesse the 10
Num: (26) AKQ9-xxx Max Tricks: 4
Cash the queen and king; if an honor drops from East, fi-
nesse the nine next. This is 6% better than cashing the three
top honors regardless
cash the Ace
if East shows out finesse the nine
and repeat if necessary
otherwise, cash the King
if East shows out or plays the Jack or ten
finesse the nine
Num: (28) AK9x-Qxx Max Tricks: 4
See (26) above
cash the Queen
if East shows out finesse the nine
and repeat if necessary
otherwise cash the Ace
if East shows out or plays the Jack or ten
finesse the nine
Num: (31) A9xx-KQx Max Tricks: 4
See (26) above
cash the King and Queen
if both follow low or East shows out or East
plays the Jack or ten, finesse the nine
Num: (62) AK98x-Jx Max Tricks: 5
Run the jack or lead small to the nine
run the jack and finesse the eight
Figure 5: Comparison of Encyclopedia's (normal font) and FINESSE 's(sans serif font) explanations for taking the maximum
number of tricks. Problem numbers are those in the Encyclopedia, and ‘x's denote arbitrary low cards.
References
ACBL. 1994. The Official Encyclopedia of Bridge. 2990
Airways Boulevard, Memphis, TN 38116-3875: American
Contract Bridge League, Inc., fifth edition.
Allis, L.; van den Herik, H.; and Herschberg, I. 1991.
Which games will survive? In Levy, D., and Beal, D.,
eds., Heuristic Programming in Artifical Intelligence 2. El-
lis Horwood. 232–243.
Brock, S. 1998. Suit Combinations in Bridge. B T Batsford
Ltd. ISBN 0713481641.
Charness, N. 1979. Components of skill in bridge. Cana-
dian Journal of Psychology 33(1):1–16.
Charness, N. 1989. Expertise in chess and bridge. In
Klahr, D., and Kotovsky, K., eds., Complex Information
Processing: The Impact of Herbert A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum. 183–208.
Engle, R. W., and Bukstel, L. 1978. Memory processes
among bridge players of differing expertise. American
Journal of Psychology 91(4):673–689.
Frank, I., and Basin, D. 1998. Search in games with in-
complete information: A case study using bridge card play.
Artificial Intelligence 100(1–2):87–123.
Frank, I., and Basin, D. 2000a. Make no mistake: Com-
puters vs suit combinations. Bridge World. To appear.
Frank, I., and Basin, D. 2000b. A theoretical and empiri-
cal investigation of search in imperfect information games.
Theoretical Computer Science. To appear.
Frank, I.; Basin, D.; and Bundy, A. 1992. An adaptation of
proof-planning to declarer play in bridge. In Proceedings
of ECAI-92, 72–76.
Ginsberg, M. 1999. GIB: Steps toward an expert-level
bridge-playing program. In Proc. IJCAI-99, 584–589.
Goren, C. H. 1986. Goren's New Bridge Complete. Cen-
tury Hutchinson Limited.
Kosmulski, M. 1990. Rozgrywka pojedynczego koloru.
PZBS (Polski Zwiazek Brydza Sportowego). in Polish (En-
glish title: “Suit Treatment”).
Roudinesco, J. 1996. The Dictionary of Suit Combinations.
Guy Tr´edaniel. ISBN 2-85707-825-0.
Smith, S., and Nau, D. 1996. A planning approach to de-
clarer play in contract bridge. Computational Intelligence
12(1):106–130.